		Yorick Documentation

The files in this Y_SITE/doc directory are:

    yorick.ps    PostScript version of (incomplete) Yorick user manual.
    refs.ps      PostScript version of Quick reference card -- 6 sheets
                 in 3 pairs for double-sided copying
    yorick.tex   TeXinfo source for yorick.ps (needs texinfo.tex)
    refs.tex     TeX source for refs.ps

    yorick.1     stub man page for yorick
    gist.1       man page for gist binary CGM browser

    std.doc      alphabetized DOCUMENT comments for standard Yorick
                 functions.  Print this file and read it after you have
                 read yorick.ps; the information is *NOT* duplicated.
    graph.doc    alphabetized DOCUMENT comments for Yorick graphics
                 functions.  Print this file and read it after you have
                 read yorick.ps; the information is *NOT* duplicated.
    math.doc     alphabetized DOCUMENT comments for matrix and FFT
                 functions.  Print this file and read it after you have
                 read yorick.ps; the information is *NOT* duplicated.
    drat.doc     alphabetized DOCUMENT comments for sample Drat transport
                 equation solver.  This is probably of interest only as
                 an example of how to write a complete Yorick application.


    FILE_FORMATS  pointers to descriptions of all the binary file formats
                  recognized or produced by Yorick

Removed:

    dir          GNU Emacs Info dir file -- for versions 19.25 and above
                 just add this directory (Y_SITE/doc) to your Info search
                 path.
    yorick.nfo*  GNU Emacs Info online version of yorick.ps

I removed the formatted GNU info documentation for Yorick to save
space in the distribution.  You can recreate it with the makeinfo
program (from prep.ai.mit.edu:/pub/gnu) and yorick.tex.  Here is
the line I use for Yorick in the TeXinfo dir file:

* Yorick: (yorick.nfo).  The Yorick interpreted programming language.
