                      Emacs Lisp code for yorick
                      --------------------------

The MS Windows and MacOS versions of yorick provide a simple
development environment including a terminal window where you can
interactively type yorick commands, and editor windows where you can
edit yorick source code.

If you want "creature comforts" like command line recall under UNIX,
you need to use GNU emacs (ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/emacs/), plus the
elisp code in this directory.  See the *.el files for installation
instructions.  This elisp code requires version 19.29 or better to
work at all, and 19.34 or better (i.e.- any version 20) to function
completely as designed.  The features of the emacs-based yorick
development environment go considerably beyond the built-in MS Windows
or MacOS environments; see the comments at the top of yorick.el for
details.  Novices or emacs-haters can optionally hide some of the
quirks of emacs, making its look-and-feel closer to MicroSoft
products.

Under MS Windows, emacs will start the yorick.exe executable so that
its MDI (multiple document interface) frame window never appears, and
yorick graphics windows will be top-level windows instead of children
of the MDI frame window.  This environment very closely resembles the
way yorick runs under emacs on a UNIX platform, so you have a choice
between yorick's built-in development environment and the emacs-based
development environment.

(This trick is currently impossible under MacOS; you can use emacs to
edit yorick source code on a Mac, but not as a terminal window where
you type commands to the yorick interpreter.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

yorick.el  -- provides emacs modes for
              (1) editing yorick source code
              (2) a terminal window for interactive yorick sessions
              (3) same terminal window for shell and ssh sessions

yorick-auto.el
   put this and yorick.el in your site-lisp directory,
   and load it in site-start.el to autoload the yorick, ysh, yssh,
   and yutil-setup functions
   -- users should still put a yutil-setup call in their .emacs

Read the comments at the top of yorick.el for instructions on how to
install and run it.
